
GNUBOY INSTALLATION


  *NIX SYSTEMS

One or more of the following is required to compile on *nix: X, SDL,
svgalib, or Linux fbcon. Since basically everyone has X, this should
not be a problem. Please note that the SDL and fbcon ports are the
most functional, however. In the future, Sun console may also be
supported.

The best and easiest way to build gnuboy for *nix is with the
configure script:

  ./configure
  make
  make install

By default, heavy optimization and asm cpu and graphics cores will be
used if available on your platform. For information on compiletime
options related to performance and debugging, type:

  ./configure --help

Alternatively, if you don't like the GNU configure script, you may
copy the Makefile.nix to Makefile and edit it by hand to work with
your system. Make sure you uncomment -DIS_LITTLE_ENDIAN if your cpu is
little endian. Please note that not everything is supported when
compiling this way, and that it should only be done as a last resort.
The generic Makefile.nix may be removed in the future since it's extra
work to maintain.

Running make should produce the binaries xgnuboy, fbgnuboy, sgnuboy
and/or sdlgnuboy, depending on the availability of the various
interface libraries on your host.  The install target will install
these to $(prefix)/bin, where prefix is specified to configure in the
usual way. The default prefix is of course /usr/local/.

Binary packages may be available for some platforms, but they are
usually not quite up to date, and are not built or supported by the
gnuboy team.

Binary package maintainers should be aware that, by default, gnuboy
will be built with optimizations specific to the exact host cpu it's
being compiled on, and may not work on older models. If you want your
binaries to work with older systems too, run configure with the
--disable-arch option to disable architecture specific compiler flags.


  WINDOWS

Mingw32 and the SDL development files are required to compile gnuboy
for Windows. They may be obtained from www.mingw.org and
www.libsdl.org, respectively.

Just copy Makefile.mingw32 to Makefile and run make. When done, put
the resulting gnuboy.exe wherever you wish to install it.

Precompiled binaries are also available for Windows; check the site
from which you obtained gnuboy to see if it provides copies.


  DOS

You'll need djgpp to use the included Makefile. Theoretically it
shouldn't be hard to port the dos-specific modules to work with other
compilers, but I see no reason why it should be necessary.

Since all DOS systems are basically alike, just copy Makefile.dos to
Makefile and type "make" to compile gnuboy. No configuration should be
necessary. If you do have build problems, let us know.

After compiling, place gnuboy.exe wherever you want.

Precompiled binaries are also available for DOS; check the site from
which you obtained gnuboy to see if it provides copies.




